.. _ira_configuration_file:

========================
Configuration File Guide
========================

This guide describes how to configure the Isaac Sim Replicator Agent (IRA) for simulation and synthetic data generation. The configuration controls the environment, sensor generation and placement, character/robot agents, behaviors, and data generation.

Concepts & Workflow
===================

Before diving into detailed configuration, it is helpful to understand the general workflow and key concepts of an IRA simulation.

Workflow Overview
-----------------

1.  **Environment Setup**: Define the static 3D environment where the simulation takes place.
2.  **Agent & Sensor Definition**: Configure characters, robots, and cameras (sensors) to populate the environment.
3.  **Behavior Configuration**: Assign routines (weighted random actions like walking, idling) and triggers (reactive behaviors like when a collision occurs) to actors.
4.  **Data Generation**: Configure the Replicator writers to generate ground-truth data (RGB, segmentation, etc.).

Key Concepts
^^^^^^^^^^^^

-   **Environment**: The static 3D world (USD stage) loaded for the simulation. It also defines the NavMesh for navigation.
-   **Agents (Actors)**: Dynamic entities in the scene, which can be **Characters** (humans) or **Robots**.
-   **Behaviors**: Atomic actions an actor can perform, such as ``wander``, ``patrol``, or ``idle``.
-   **Routines**: A collection of behaviors assigned to an actor group. Actors randomly select behaviors from this pool based on assigned weights.
-   **Triggers**: Conditional logic that interrupts normal routines. When a condition is met (e.g., a specific time or event), the trigger executes its defined list of behaviors in sequence. Once the trigger sequence is complete, the agent resumes its standard routine until another trigger activates.
-   **Sensors**: Cameras placed in the scene to observe the simulation.
-   **Replicator**: The system responsible for rendering frames and writing annotated data (ground truth) to disk or cloud storage.

Top-level Structure
===================

Configs are YAML files with a single root key ``isaacsim.replicator.agent``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    isaacsim.replicator.agent:
      version: 1.0.0
      environment: { ... }            # required
      seed: 123456789                 # optional; 32-bit (0..4294967295); autogenerated if omitted
      simulation_duration: 60.0       # optional; defaults to 60.0
      character: { ... }              # optional
      robot: { ... }                  # optional
      sensor: { ... }                 # optional
      replicator: { ... }             # optional

Root Parameters
---------------

-   **version** (required): Semantic version of the configuration schema (e.g., "1.0.0").
-   **environment** (required): Defines the simulation world.
-   **seed** (optional): A 32-bit unsigned integer (0..4,294,967,295).
    -   Used to initialize random number generators for deterministic simulations (e.g., character spawn locations, routine variations).
    -   If omitted, a seed is generated based on the current system time.
-   **simulation_duration** (optional): The total run time of the simulation in seconds.
    -   The simulation runs at a fixed time step corresponding to **30 FPS**.
    -   Defaults to ``60.0`` seconds.
-   **character** (optional): Configures human agents (appearance, behaviors like wander/patrol, and triggers).
-   **robot** (optional): Configures robot agents (config path, behaviors/commands, data collection).
-   **sensor** (optional): Configures static cameras using placement strategies (e.g., aim at targets, coverage).
-   **replicator** (optional): Configures data writers (e.g., output directory, annotators like RGB/segmentation).

Quick Start (Minimal)
---------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    isaacsim.replicator.agent:
      version: 1.0.0
      environment:
        base_stage_asset_path: "Isaac/Environments/Simple_Warehouse/full_warehouse.usd"

Sections
========
Environment
-----------

Defines the static 3D environment and additional assets to load.

-   ``base_stage_asset_path`` (required): Path or URL to the main USD stage.
    -   Supports ``http(s)://`` (including S3 presigned URLs), Windows/UNC paths, and local filesystem paths.
    -   Also supports paths relative to the :ref:`isaac_assets_overview` root.
-   ``prop_asset_paths`` (optional): A list of additional USD assets to load as **sublayers** into the stage. This is useful for adding props or lighting to a base environment without modifying it. Supports paths relative to the :ref:`isaac_assets_overview` root.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    environment:
      base_stage_asset_path: "Isaac/Environments/Simple_Warehouse/full_warehouse.usd"
      prop_asset_paths:
        - "Isaac/Props/Conveyors/ConveyorBelt_A08.usd"

Character
---------

Defines groups of human characters, their appearance, and their behavior.

-   ``root_prim_path`` (optional): Root path for spawning characters (default: ``/World/Characters``).
-   ``groups``: Dictionary of character groups.

Character Group Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-   ``num`` (required): Number of characters to spawn.
-   ``asset_path`` (optional): USD path to character assets. Supports paths relative to the :ref:`isaac_assets_overview` root. Default: ``Isaac/People/Characters/``.
-   ``spawn_areas`` (optional): List of **NavMesh area names** where characters can spawn. If empty, spawns anywhere on the NavMesh.
-   ``semantic_labels`` (optional): List of ``[type, data]`` pairs for semantic segmentation. Default: ``[["class", "character"]]``.
-   ``motion_library_path`` (optional): Path to a custom motion library file. Supports paths relative to the :ref:`isaac_assets_overview` root. Default: ``Isaac/People/MotionLibrary/HumanMotionLibrary.usd``.
-   ``routines`` (optional): List of behaviors the characters will execute. Default: ``[{ wander: {} }]``.
-   ``triggers`` (optional): List of event-based triggers that interrupt routines.

Behaviors
^^^^^^^^^

Behaviors are defined in the ``routines`` list. Common fields:

-   ``weight`` (default 1): Probability weight for selecting this behavior.
-   ``repeat`` (default 1): How many times to repeat this behavior before choosing a new one.

**Supported Behaviors:**

1.  **wander**: Randomly walk and idle.

    -   ``walk``:
        -   ``speed_range``: [min, max] m/s (default [1.0, 1.0]).
        -   ``distance_range``: [min, max] distance to travel per walk leg (default [5.0, 15.0]).
        -   ``navigation_areas``: List of allowed NavMesh area tags.

    -   ``idle``: Array of idle options.
        -   ``animation``: Name of the animation (must exist in motion lib).
        -   ``time_range``: [min, max] duration in seconds (default [2.0, 5.0]).
        -   ``weight``: Selection probability.

2.  **patrol**: Follow a specific path.

    -   ``speed_range``: [min, max] m/s (default [1.0, 1.0]).
    -   One of:
        -   ``path_points``: List of 3D points ``[[x,y,z], [x,y,z], ...]``.
        -   ``target_prims``: List of prim paths to visit.

        .. note::
            Both ``path_points`` and ``target_prims`` must be on the :doc:`NavMesh <extensions:ext_navigation-mesh>` and reachable by the actors.

3.  **custom_behavior**: Execute a Behavior Tree from a file.

    -   ``behavior_name``: Identifier.
    -   ``behavior_subtree``: Path to the behavior JSON file.
    -   ``params``: Dictionary of arbitrary parameters passed to the tree.

Triggers
^^^^^^^^

Triggers define events that interrupt normal routines to execute a list of reaction behavior.

Each actor can specify a list of triggers to listen to.

-   ``priority`` (default 1): Higher priority triggers override lower ones.
-   ``behavior``: List of behaviors to execute when triggered.

**Trigger Types:**

-   ``event_trigger``: Fires on a named carb event.

-   ``time_trigger``: Fires after a specific duration during play (in seconds).

    .. tip::

        **Dispatching Events from Python**

        .. code-block:: python

            # Send out a custom event named 'my_test_event'
            import carb
            carb.eventdispatcher.get_eventdispatcher().dispatch_event(event_name="my_test_event")

            # Actors spawned by trigger setting will react to `my_test_event`.
            # triggers:
            #   - event_trigger:
            #     event: my_test_event
            #     priority: 10
            #     behavior: [...]

**Example:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    character:
      root_prim_path: "/World/Characters"
      groups:
        warehouse_workers:
          asset_path: "Isaac/People/Characters/"
          num: 10
          spawn_areas: ["warehouse_floor"]
          routines:
            - wander:
                walk:
                  speed_range: [0.8, 1.5]
                  distance_range: [5.0, 10.0]
                idle:
                  - animation: look_around
                    time_range: [2.0, 5.0]
          triggers:
            - time_trigger:
                time: 30.0
                priority: 10
                behavior:
                  - patrol: # Move to break room
                      speed_range: [1.0, 1.2]
                      target_prims: ["/World/BreakRoom"]
            - event_trigger:
                event: test_event
                priority: 10
                behavior:
                  - patrol:
                      speed_range: [5.0, 5.5]
                      path_points:
                        - [0, 0, 0]
                        - [0, -5, 0]

Robot
-----

Defines robot agents. Robots can be controlled via behaviors OR an external command file.

-   ``root_prim_path`` (optional): Root path for robots (default: ``/World/Robots``).
-   ``groups``: Dictionary of robot groups.

Robot Group Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-   ``num`` (required): Number of robots.
-   ``config_file_path`` (required): Path to the **IAR (Isaac Agent) configuration file** for this robot type. Supports absolute paths or paths relative to the IAR built-in robot config sample folder (located in ``isaacsim/anim/robot/agent/configs`` within the ``isaacsim.anim.robot`` extension).
-   ``command_file_path`` (optional): Path to a global command file. **Mutually exclusive with** ``routines``.
-   ``spawn_areas`` (optional): NavMesh areas for spawning.
-   ``agent_radius`` (optional): Radius in meters (default 0.5) used for NavMesh queries.
-   ``write_data`` (optional): If ``true``, enables data collection from the robot's onboard cameras. *Not available in Isaac Sim 6.0 EA yet. (Coming in 6.0 GA)*
-   ``camera_prim_paths`` (optional): List of specific camera prims on the robot to use. If empty and ``write_data`` is true, *all* cameras on the robot are used. *Not available in Isaac Sim 6.0 EA yet. (Coming in 6.0 GA)*
-   ``semantic_labels`` (optional): Default ``[["class", "robot"]]``.
-   ``semantic_label_path`` (optional): Relative path under the robot prim to apply semantics.
-   ``routines`` / ``triggers``: Similar to characters but with robot-specific behaviors.

Robot Behaviors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-   **wander**:
    -   ``move``: { ``distance_range``: [min, max] (default [10.0, 15.0]), ``navigation_areas``: [tags] }
    -   ``idle``: { ``time_range``: [min, max] (default [2.0, 5.0]) }
-   **patrol**:
    -   ``path_points``: List of 3D points.
-   **stop**:
    -   ``time_range``: [min, max] seconds to remain stopped (default [5.0, 5.0]).

Sensor
------

Defines static cameras in the scene. Cameras are organized into named **groups**.

-   ``root_prim_path`` (optional): Absolute prim path where all camera groups will be created (default: ``/World/Cameras``).
-   ``groups``: A dictionary where keys are group names and values define the camera configuration.

Group Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each group must specify ``num`` (number of cameras) and **one** placement strategy (``aim_at_targets`` OR ``maximum_coverage``).
- For ``aim_at_targets``, ``num`` must be >= 0.
- For ``maximum_coverage``, ``num`` can be >= -1. If ``-1``, the number of cameras is automatically calculated based on the grid resolution and coverage ratio.

**1. Placement Strategy: aim_at_targets**

Places cameras to look at specific targets.

-   ``targets`` (optional): List of target prim paths (e.g., ``/World/Characters``) or identifiers.
-   ``raycast_density`` (optional): Density of rays used to find valid camera positions. Higher values are more precise but slower.
-   ``yaw_range`` (optional): [min, max] degrees (0..360) for the camera's rotation around the target.
-   ``occlusion_threshold`` (optional): Threshold for filtering occluded views (-1 to disable).

**2. Placement Strategy: maximum_coverage**

Places cameras to maximize visual coverage of the environment.

-   ``target_coverage_ratio`` (optional): Desired coverage ratio (0.0 to 1.0). Default ``0.9``.
-   ``grid_resolution`` (optional): Size of the grid cells (in meters) used for coverage calculation. Default ``1.0``.

**Shared Parameters**

These apply to all placement strategies:

-   ``height_range``: [min, max] height in meters (Z-axis).
-   ``look_down_angle_range``: [min, max] pitch angle in degrees (0 = horizontal, 90 = straight down).
-   ``focal_length_range``: [min, max] focal length in millimeters.
-   ``distance_range``: [min, max] distance from the camera to its target/interest point in meters.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
      root_prim_path: "/World/Cameras"
      groups:
        ceiling_cameras:
          num: 20
          aim_at_targets:
            targets: ["/World/Characters"]
            distance_range: [5, 10]
            height_range: [7, 10]
            focal_length_range: [10, 15]
            look_down_angle_range: [30, 45]
        coverage_cameras:
          num: 5
          maximum_coverage:
            target_coverage_ratio: 0.8
            height_range: [2, 5]

Replicator
----------

Controls the generation of synthetic data (images, annotations) using Omniverse Replicator.

-   ``writers`` (required): Dictionary of writer configurations.
-   ``hide_debug_visualization`` (optional, default ``true``): Hides debug visualizations (NavMesh, skeletons, lights) during data capture.

Writer Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Supported writers: ``BasicWriter``, ``IRABasicWriter``, ``CosmosIRAWriter``, ``RTSPWriter``, ``CustomWriter``.

**Common Settings per Writer:**

-   **Timing**:
    -   ``start_frame`` / ``end_frame``: Frame-based control (inclusive/exclusive). Defaults to ``start_frame: 30`` if not specified.
    -   ``start_time`` / ``end_time``: Time-based control (seconds).
-   **Sensors**:
    -   ``sensor_prim_list``: Optional list of cameras to use. If omitted, uses all cameras defined in ``sensor.root_prim_path``.

**Output Settings:**

-   ``output_dir``: Local directory for output. Defaults to ``~/IRA_output`` if not set.
-   ``s3_bucket``, ``s3_region``, ``s3_endpoint``: For direct S3 upload.

**Common Annotators (Parameters):**

-   ``rgb``: RGB Image.
-   ``bounding_box_2d_tight`` / ``loose``: 2D Bounding boxes.
-   ``bounding_box_3d``: 3D Bounding boxes.
-   ``semantic_segmentation``: Pixel-wise semantic class IDs.
-   ``instance_segmentation``: Pixel-wise instance IDs.
-   ``distance_to_camera``: Depth map.
-   ``normals``: Surface normals.
-   ``motion_vectors``: Pixel motion.
-   ``colorize_*``: e.g., ``colorize_semantic_segmentation`` (save as visible color map vs raw ID).

Specialized Writers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1.  **IRABasicWriter**:

    The foundational writer for Agent simulations, derived from Replicator's ``BasicWriter``. It organizes output into separate folders per annotator and consolidates object/agent metadata into ``object_detection.json``.

    -   **Key Features**:

        -   **Folder Structure**: Outputs each annotator's data into separate folders for better readability.
        -   **Object Detection**: Consolidates bounding box and skeleton data into a single file named ``object_detection.json``.
        -   **Default Semantic Filter**: ``class:character|robot;id:*`` (captures characters and robots).
        -   **Action data output**: When object detection is enabled (object_info or agent_info annotators are on), the action data for each IRA actor will be included as well.

    -   **Overwritten Annotators**:
        The following standard annotators are replaced by specialized ``object_info_*`` versions and written to ``object_detection.json``:

        -   ``bounding_box_2d_tight``
        -   ``bounding_box_2d_loose``
        -   ``bounding_box_3d``
        -   ``skeleton_data`` (replaced by ``agent_info_skeleton_data``)

    -   **Defaults**:

        -   ``rgb``: Enabled.
        -   ``camera_params``: Enabled.
        -   S3-related parameters: Disabled.

    -   **Special Parameters**:

        -   ``video_rendering_annotator_list``: Generates .mp4 videos for specified annotators (e.g., ``["rgb", "semantic_segmentation"]``).
        -   ``agent_info_skeleton_data``: Exports 2D/3D skeleton joints for characters.

    -   **Action data**:

        Action data is for describing the current behavior of each actor. It is in ``object_detection.json`` under the ``metro_agent_data`` section. Data includes:

        - ``prim path``: The prim path of the actor schema is applied.
        - ``agent_type``: The actor schema type.
        - ``agent_name``: The name of the actor.
        - ``agent_group``: The group name of the actor.
        - ``world_position``: Actor position (vec3) in world space.
        - ``world_rotation``: Actor rotation (quaternion) in world space.
        - ``world_moving_direction``: Actor moving direction (vec3) in world space. ``null`` means actor is not moving.
        - ``world_facing_direction``: Actor facing direction (vec3) in world space.
        - ``speed``: The actor moving speed.
        - ``current_task_name``: Actor's current action name (not behavior name).
        - ``asset_url``: The asset URL of the actor.

2.  **CosmosIRAWriter**:

    -   Adds "Cosmos" specific post-processing.
    -   ``shaded_seg``: Shaded segmentation visualization.
    -   ``canny_edge``: Canny edge detection filter (with ``canny_threshold_low/high``).

3.  **RTSPWriter**:

    Streams selected annotators live over RTSP instead of saving frames to disk. It spins up an ``ffmpeg`` process per camera and annotator and pushes raw frame buffers into that stream.

    -   **Key Features**:

        -   **Live RTSP Streaming**: Publishes each camera and annotator to ``rtsp://<host>:<port>/<topic>_<camera>_<annotator>``.
        -   **Per-annotator Streams**: Each enabled annotator gets its own RTSP endpoint.
        -   **Hardware/Software Encoding**: NVENC for supported 8-bit RGBA annotators with a software fallback for others.
        -   **Automatic GPU Distribution**: Multiple GPUs are automatically distributed across available render products.

    .. dropdown:: RTSP setup (FFmpeg)

        Before streaming from Isaac Sim using ``RTSPWriter``, install FFmpeg.

        Run the following command on Linux:

        .. code-block:: shell
            :caption: Install FFmpeg on Linux

            sudo apt update && sudo apt install -y ffmpeg

        Run the following command on Windows 10/11:

        .. code-block:: shell
            :caption: Install FFmpeg on Windows 10/11

            winget install ffmpeg

    .. dropdown:: RTSP parameters and annotators

        Each of these parameters is represented as a boolean toggle in the UI. Enabling any of them will include that data type in the RTSP output stream.

        -   ``rtsp_stream_url``: Base RTSP server URL.
        -   ``rtsp_rgb``: Toggle RGB stream (LdrColor).
        -   ``rtsp_semantic_segmentation``: Toggle semantic segmentation stream.
        -   ``rtsp_instance_id_segmentation``: Toggle instance ID segmentation stream.
        -   ``rtsp_instance_segmentation``: Toggle instance segmentation stream.
        -   ``rtsp_normals``: Toggle normals stream.
        -   ``rtsp_distance_to_image_plane``: Toggle distance to image plane stream.
        -   ``rtsp_distance_to_camera``: Toggle distance to camera stream.
        -   ``device``: NVENC GPU index.

        Supported RTSP annotators:

        -   ``rgb`` (LdrColor)
        -   ``semantic_segmentation``
        -   ``instance_id_segmentation``
        -   ``instance_segmentation``
        -   ``normals``
        -   ``distance_to_camera``
        -   ``distance_to_image_plane``

    .. dropdown:: RTSP stream URL format

        Each stream URL follows this format:

        ``[rtsp_stream_url]/RTSPWriter[camera_prim_path_with_underscores]_[annotator_name]``

        Where:

        -   ``rtsp_stream_url``: Base RTSP server URL (for example, ``rtsp://localhost:8554/RTSPWriter``).
        -   ``camera_prim_path_with_underscores``: The camera prim path with forward slashes replaced by underscores.
        -   ``annotator_name``: The original annotator name (for example, ``rgb`` or ``distance_to_camera``).

        Examples (``rtsp_stream_url`` = ``rtsp://localhost:8554/RTSPWriter``):

        -   RGB stream for ``/World/Cameras/Camera_01``:
            ``rtsp://localhost:8554/RTSPWriter_World_Cameras_Camera_01_rgb``
        -   Distance-to-camera stream for ``/World/Cameras/Camera``:
            ``rtsp://localhost:8554/RTSPWriter_World_Cameras_Camera_distance_to_camera``

    .. dropdown:: RTSP defaults

        -   ``rtsp_rgb``: Enabled.
        -   All other ``rtsp_*`` annotators: Disabled.
        -   ``rtsp_stream_url``: ``rtsp://localhost:8554/RTSPWriter``.
        -   ``device``: ``0`` (NVENC GPU index).

    .. dropdown:: RTSP runtime notes

        Warning messages are posted to the console to show the match between annotator names and RTSP stream URLs.
        Initializing RTSP streaming may take a while.
        During RTSP stream initialization, the first few frames may exhibit visual artifacts or corruption. This is expected behavior and resolves after the stream is fully established.

.. note::
    In Isaac Sim 6.0 EA release, we support only the ``IRABasicWriter``. Other writers will be supported in the Isaac Sim 6.0 GA release.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    replicator:
      writers:
        IRABasicWriter:
          # Output Config
          output_dir: "/home/IRA_Output"
          s3_post_upload: false

          # Timing
          start_frame: 0
          end_frame: 300

          # Annotators
          rgb: true
          camera_params: true
          bounding_box_2d_tight: true
          semantic_segmentation: true
          agent_info_skeleton_data: true

          # Video
          video_rendering_annotator_list: ["rgb", "semantic_segmentation"]

